this
is lol brook in berkshire it's the stage
for one of our most
fascinating natural events
the first mayfly emergence
i'm one show wildlife cameraman tom
hartwell
mayflies have one of the shortest adult
lives
in the insect world it's absolutely
packed with action though
they swarm together in their thousands
looking for a mate
which in turn attracts an army of
predators
for some of these mayflies their lives
will be over in just
five minutes the lucky ones might manage
a few days
mayflies start life underwater known as
nymphs
they live on the riverbed where they
help to keep the water clean
by feeding on algae and plant life
when the time is right they shed their
old skin
ready to take their maiden flight
when they first emerge the mayflies are
known as duns
as they rest on the surface drying their
wings they make a tasty snack for coots
and malads
those that survive fly to the bank where
they begin
a second transformation
i can see an adult mayfly which has just
emerged
leaving behind his drab old skin and
reaching its final form
the adults are known as spinners and
they have
one purpose in life to breed
but time is of the essence adult
mayflies don't have proper mouths
so it's impossible for them to feed they
are entirely reliant on energy reserves
and flying burns through those very
quickly
[Music]
as the light fades courtship intensifies
now is their time to shine
the mayflies propel themselves up into
the air on their energy reserves
and parachute back down eager to impress
a mate
by swarming together in their thousands
these mayflies
increase their chances of breeding
successfully
males grab the females with their
elongated front legs
and the pears mate in midair
the females flutter back to the water
where they must lay their eggs
if they are to reproduce
but there are still more predators
lurking
it's a feeding frenzy for fish like
roach
trout and breen
this female at least has made it
releasing her
eggs into the water where they will soon
become the next generation
of mayfly nymphs
the mayflies are now spent but they have
achieved their goal in life
ensuring the future of this fascinating
yet fleeting spectacle
[Music]
you